KIE-ISSUES 1056 - Introduce AuthZ Guide for SonataFlow Deployments (#614)
apache/incubator-kie-kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/cloud/custom-ingress-authz.adoc

== Architecture

The following image illustrates a simplified architecture view of the recommended approach for protecting {product_name} workflow endpoints.

image::cloud/apisix-keycloak/ingress-apisix-keycloak.png[]

1. User makes a request with their credentials
2. APISIX do the JWT token introspection in the OIDC Server (Keycloak)
3. Keycloak validates the token
4. APISIX forwards the request to the workflow application

This is a simplified approach for OIDC use cases. In production environments, you can tailor your gateway and OIDC server to meet your requirements and scope.

[IMPORTANT]
====
This approach only protects the communication via Ingress. Direct calls to the workflow application link:{kubernetes_svc_url}[internal service] would be anonymous.
For example, another microservice in the cluster making requests to the workflow internal service.
Make sure to set link:{kubernetes_networkpolicy_url}[Kuberbetes NetworkPolicies] to your workflow applications if this is not the desired behavior.
====

== How to Deploy the Example Architecture

> In the following sections you will be able to understand and deploy the example architecture using APISIX and Keycloak to protect your {product_name} workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections describe how to deploy the example architecture using APISIX and Keycloak to protect your {product_name} workflows.
```

.Prerequisites

* Minikube installed. You can use KIND or any other cluster if you have admin access. Just ensure to adapt the steps below to your environment.
* link:{sonataflow_apisix_example_url}[Clone the example SonataFlow APISIX with Keycloak in a local directory].
* (Optional) xref:cloud/operator/install-serverless-operator.adoc[{operator_name} installed] if you're going to deploy via the operator.
* (Optional) xref:use-cases/advanced-developer-use-cases/deployments/deploying-on-minikube.adoc[Quarkus {product_name} workflow deployed] if you're not using the operator.

=== Installing Keycloak

From the example's cloned directory, run the following command:

.Running kustomize to install Keycloak
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
kubectl create ns keycloak
kubectl kustomize manifests/bases | kubectl apply -f - -n keycloak
----

> This command will create a namespace called `keycloak` and a Keycloak server deployment connected to a PostgreSQL database to persist your data across cluster restarts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command creates a namespace called `keycloak` and a Keycloak server deployment connected to a PostgreSQL database to persist your data across cluster restarts.
```

====

==== Configuring the Keycloak OIDC Server

In this next step, you should be able to login to the Keycloak admin console in the address link:http://keycloak.keycloak.svc.cluster.local:8080[] using the default credentials.

Once in the console, click on "Create realm" in the top left menu. In this screen you will be able to create a new realm named "sonataflow". See the image bellow for more details:

.Creation of the new realm "sonataflow"
image::cloud/apisix-keycloak/01-create-realm.png[]

Next, you must create a client for the APISIX Ingress to introspect the JWT tokens.

In the left menu, make sure that you're in the "sonataflow" realm and click on "Clients", then "Create client". Give the name "apisix-ingress" and then click on "Next".

.Creation of the APISIX Ingress client
image::cloud/apisix-keycloak/02-create-client.png[]

Next, you should be able to add the details about this client:

1. Turn the "Client authentication" option on.
2. Leave "Authorization" off.
3. Mark the options "Standard flow" and "Direct access grants" and leave the rest blank.

.APISIX Ingress client details
image::cloud/apisix-keycloak/03-create-client.png[]

> Click on "Next", leave everything in blank in the next screen and click on "Save".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click on "Next", leave everything blank in the next screen and click on "Save".
```

==== Creating the user

You will access the workflow application in this example with a user registered in the Keycloak server. 

[IMPORTANT]
====
For simplicity, we will use the link:{keycloak_resource_owner_granttype_url}[Grant Type Resource Owner Password]. This flow is not recommended for production architectures. Consider using other mechanisms such as Authorization Code or Client Credentials.
====

In the left menu, make sure that you're in the "sonataflow" realm and click on "Users" and then "Create new user".

In this screen, fill in the details according to the figure below:

> 1. Turn "Email verified" option on.
> 2. Username set to `luke`.
> 3. Email to `luke@republic.org`
> 4. First name `Luke` and last name `Skywalker`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Turn "Email verified" option on.
2. Set "Username" to `luke`.
3. Set "Email" to `luke@republic.org`
4. Set "First name" to `Luke` and "Last name" to `Skywalker`
```

.Creating the workflow user
image::cloud/apisix-keycloak/05-create-user.png[]

Click on "Create".

Next, set the credentials for this newly created user. Click on "Users" in the left menu and then in the name "luke". 

In this screen, click on the tab "Credentials", and then on "Set password".

.Setting user's password
image::cloud/apisix-keycloak/06-user-set-password.png[]

Set the password as "luke" (same as the username), leave the "Temporary" option off and click on "Save".

You will use the credentials `luke`/`luke` later in this guide to acquire a JWT token to make requests to the workflow application.

=== Installing the APISIX Ingress

Follow the documentation on link:{apisix_install_url}[APISIX Documentation website] and install the APISIX Ingress in your cluster. You should have to install HELM client first.

If you're running on minikube, you must expose the APISIX Ingress server:

.Exposing Keycloak to the local network
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
minikube service apisix-gateway --url -n ingress-apisix
----

> The command outcome is the local URL which you can access the Ingress you will create later in this guide. Leave the terminal opened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command outcome is the local URL which you can access the Ingress you will create later in this guide. Leave the terminal open.
```

[TIP]
====
If you are not running on Minikube, see the APISIX Ingress documentation for more information on how to expose the Ingress already in your cluster. 
====

After this step, Keycloak OIDC Server and APISIX Ingress Controller on your cluster are able to protect your {product_name} workflow applications from external requests.

== Deploying the {product_name} sample workflow

In this section, learn how to deploy the Greeting workflow example and a custom APIXSIX Ingress to protect external requests to the application's endpoints.

.Prerequisites

* You installed, configured, and exposed the Keycloak server
* You installed and exposed the APISIX Ingress server
* You installed the {operator_name} 
* You link:{sonataflow_apisix_example_url}[cloned the example application locally]

The first step is to deploy the {product_name} workflow. 

Enter the example project directory that you cloned locally and run the command below:

> .Deploying the "Greeting" workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Deploying the Greeting workflow
```

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
kubectl create ns sonataflow
kubectl apply -f workflow-app/01-sonataflow-greeting.yaml -n sonataflow
----

You can follow the workflow deployment by running

.Follow the workflow deployment process
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
kubectl -n sonataflow get workflow/greeting -w

NAME       PROFILE   VERSION   URL   READY   REASON
greeting             0.0.1           False   WaitingForBuild
----

=== Configuring the Ingress Route

> Once you deployed the {product_name} workflow you can configure and deploy the APISIX Route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you deploy the {product_name} workflow you can configure and deploy the APISIX Route.
```

Open the file `workflow-app/02-sonataflow-route.yaml` in the example application you cloned earlier and change the credentials for the `apisix-ingress` client that you created in the Keycloak server:

> ."Greetings" workflow APISIX Route

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Greeting workflow APISIX Route
```

[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----

> apiVersion: apisix.apache.org/v2
> kind: ApisixRoute
> metadata:
>   name: sonataflow
>   namespace: sonataflow
> spec:
>   http:
>   - name: greeting
>     match:
>       hosts:
>       - local.greeting.sonataflow.org
>       paths:
>       - "/*"
>     backends:
>     - serviceName: greeting
>       servicePort: 80
>     plugins:
>     - name: openid-connect <1>
>       enable: true
>       config:
>         client_id: apisix-ingress
>         client_secret:  <2>
>         discovery: http://keycloak.keycloak.svc.cluster.local:8080/realms/sonataflow/.well-known/openid-configuration
>         scope: profile email
>         bearer_only: true
>         realm: sonataflow
>         introspection_endpoint_auth_method: client_secret_post

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: apisix.apache.org/v2
kind: ApisixRoute
metadata:
  name: sonataflow
  namespace: sonataflow
spec:
  http:
    - name: greeting
      match:
        hosts:
          - local.greeting.sonataflow.org
        paths:
          - "/*"
      backends:
        - serviceName: greeting
          servicePort: 80
      plugins:
        - name: openid-connect <1>
          enable: true
          config:
            client_id: apisix-ingress
            client_secret: <2>
            discovery: http://keycloak.keycloak.svc.cluster.local:8080/realms/sonataflow/.well-known/openid-configuration
            scope: profile email
            bearer_only: true
            realm: sonataflow
            introspection_endpoint_auth_method: client_secret_post
```

----

<1> The link:{}[OpenID Connect plugin] to make the Ingress connect to Keycloak
<2> The `apisix-ingress` client credential to be changed

> Open the Keycloak server (link:http://keycloak.keycloak.svc.cluster.local:8080[]) and in the realm "sonataflow" click on "Clients", and then on "apisix-ingress".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the Keycloak server (link:http://keycloak.keycloak.svc.cluster.local:8080[]) and in the realm `sonataflow` click on *Clients*, and then on `apisix-ingress`.
```

> Click on the tab "Credentials" and copy the "Client Secret":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click on the tab *Credentials* and copy the *Client Secret*:
```

> <2> The `apisix-ingress` client credential that you will change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> The `apisix-ingress` client credential to be changed
```

.Creating the workflow user
image::cloud/apisix-keycloak/04-client-credentials.png[]

> Paste the "Client Secret" into the `ApisixRoute` file `workflow-app/02-sonataflow-route.yaml` in the example application and run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paste the *Client Secret* into the `ApisixRoute` file `workflow-app/02-sonataflow-route.yaml` in the example application and run:
```

.Deploy the `ApisixRoute`
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
kubectl apply -f workflow-app/02-sonataflow-route.yaml -n sonataflow
----

> To this point, you have installed in your cluster the Keycloak and APISIX Ingress server, and deployed the example "Greetings" workflow application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To this point, you have installed in your cluster the Keycloak and APISIX Ingress server, and deployed the example Greeting workflow application.
```

=== Accessing the Workflow

Access the workflow without a token to see a rejection:

.Directly accessing the workflow without a token
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----

> curl -v POST http://127.0.0.1:$\{INGRESS_PORT\}/greeting -H "Content-type: application/json" -H "Host: local.greeting.sonataflow.org" --data '{ "name": "Luke" }' 

Reviewer: The url may be different on the users environment. So I think it is better to use url instead of port. + I would add the note as we replace the part of the command here.

```suggestion
INGRESS_URL= <1>

curl -v POST $\{INGRESS_URL\}/greeting -H "Content-type: application/json" -H "Host: local.greeting.sonataflow.org" --data '{ "name": "Luke" }' 
```

> You should not be able to access the workflow without a token, so to test it you can run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Access the workflow without a token to see a rejection:
```

----

> You should receive a 401 HTTP Status message dening your access to the workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should receive a 401 HTTP Status message denying your access to the workflow.
```

> You should receive a 401 HTTP Status message denying your access to the workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See a 401 HTTP Status message denying your access to the workflow.
```

> Next, try to access the application using an access token. First, you need to get the access token from the Keycloak server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, access the application using an access token. First, you need to get the access token from the Keycloak server:
```

.Requesting an access token to Keycloak server
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
CLIENT_SECRET="secret from apisix-ingress client" <1>

ACCESS_TOKEN=$(curl \
  -d "client_id=apisix-ingress" \
  -d "client_secret=$\{CLIENT_SECRET\}" \
  -d "username=luke" \
  -d "password=luke" \
  -d "grant_type=password" \
  "http://keycloak.keycloak.svc.cluster.local:8080/realms/sonataflow/protocol/openid-connect/token" | jq -r .access_token) <2>
----

<1> Copy the secret from the `apisix-ingress` client
<2> Request an access token from the Keycloak server using the user `luke` credentials

Having the access token set in an environment variable, access the application again:

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
INGRESS_PORT= <1>

curl -v POST http://127.0.0.1:$\{INGRESS_PORT\}/greeting -H "Content-type: application/json" -H "Host: local.greeting.sonataflow.org" -H "Authorization: Bearer $\{ACCESS_TOKEN\}" --data '{ "name": "Luke" }' 
----

> <1> The ingress port should be acessible via the Minikube service command. You haven't done it already, you can run it with `minikube service apisix-gateway --url -n ingress-apisix`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> The ingress port should be accessible via the Minikube service command. You haven't done it already, you can run it with `minikube service apisix-gateway --url -n ingress-apisix`.
```

> <1> The ingress port should be accessible via the Minikube service command. You haven't done it already, you can run it with `minikube service apisix-gateway --url -n ingress-apisix`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> The ingress port is accessible via the Minikube service command. If you have not done it already, run `minikube service apisix-gateway --url -n ingress-apisix`.
```

> This request is passing through the APISIX Gateway, which is validating the token via the `Authorization: Bearer` header. Then the request is passed internally to the workflow application, which will process and return to the original client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This request is passing through the APISIX Gateway, which is validating the token via the `Authorization: Bearer` header. Then the request is passed internally to the workflow application which process and return to the original client.
```

For example, another microservice in the cluster making requests to the workflow internal service.
Make sure to set link:{kubernetes_networkpolicy_url}[Kuberbetes NetworkPolicies] to your workflow applications if this is not the desired behavior.
====

== How to Deploy the Example Architecture

The following sections describe how to deploy the example architecture using APISIX and Keycloak to protect your {product_name} workflows.

.Prerequisites

* Minikube is installed. You can use Kind or any other cluster if you have admin access. Just ensure to adapt the steps below to your environment.
* link:{sonataflow_apisix_example_url}[Clone the example SonataFlow APISIX with Keycloak in a local directory].
* (Optional) xref:cloud/operator/install-serverless-operator.adoc[{operator_name} is installed] if you are going to deploy via the operator.
* (Optional) xref:use-cases/advanced-developer-use-cases/deployments/deploying-on-minikube.adoc[Quarkus {product_name} workflow is deployed] if you are not using the operator.

=== Installing Keycloak

> From the example's cloned directory, run the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the example's cloned directory 'sonataflow-apisix-oidc', run the following command:
```

In this screen, fill in the details according to the figure below:

1. Switch *Email verified* option on.
2. Set *Username* to `luke`.
3. Set *Email* to `luke@republic.org`
4. Set *First name* to `Luke` and *Last name* to `Skywalker`

.Creating a workflow user
image::cloud/apisix-keycloak/05-create-user.png[]

Click on *Create*.

Next, set the credentials for this newly created user. Click on *Users* in the left menu and then in the name `luke`. 

In this screen, click on the tab *Credentials*, and then on *Set password*.

.Setting user's password
image::cloud/apisix-keycloak/06-user-set-password.png[]

Set the password as `luke` (same as the username), leave the *Temporary* option off and click on *Save*.

Use the credentials `luke`/`luke` later in this guide to acquire a JWT token to make requests to the workflow application.

=== Installing the APISIX Ingress

Follow the documentation on link:{apisix_install_url}[APISIX Documentation website] and install the APISIX Ingress in your cluster (install the HELM client first).

If you are running on Minikube, expose the APISIX Ingress server:

> .Exposing Keycloak to the local network

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Exposing apisix-ingress service to the local network
```

.Directly accessing the workflow without a token
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
INGRESS_URL= <1>

curl -v POST $\{INGRESS_URL\}/greeting -H "Content-type: application/json" -H "Host: local.greeting.sonataflow.org" --data '{ "name": "Luke" }' 
----

<1> The ingress url is accessible via the Minikube service command. If you have not done it already, run `minikube service apisix-gateway --url -n ingress-apisix`.

See a 401 HTTP Status message denying your access to the workflow.

Next, access the application using an access token. First, you need to get the access token from the Keycloak server:

.Requesting an access token to Keycloak server
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
CLIENT_SECRET="secret from apisix-ingress client" <1>

ACCESS_TOKEN=$(curl \
  -d "client_id=apisix-ingress" \
  -d "client_secret=$\{CLIENT_SECRET\}" \
  -d "username=luke" \
  -d "password=luke" \
  -d "grant_type=password" \
  "http://keycloak.keycloak.svc.cluster.local:8080/realms/sonataflow/protocol/openid-connect/token" | jq -r .access_token) <2>
----

<1> Copy the secret from the `apisix-ingress` client
<2> Request an access token from the Keycloak server using the user `luke` credentials

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

[NOTE]
====
The token returned with the command above has a default timeout of 5 minutes, which means that if you take too long to use it, or want to execute several requests, you might need to execute the command again and get a new token.
====
```

Having the access token set in an environment variable, access the application again:

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
INGRESS_URL= <1>

curl -v POST $\{INGRESS_URL\}/greeting -H "Content-type: application/json" -H "Host: local.greeting.sonataflow.org" -H "Authorization: Bearer $\{ACCESS_TOKEN\}" --data '{ "name": "Luke" }' 
----

<1> The ingress url is accessible via the Minikube service command. If you have not done it already, run `minikube service apisix-gateway --url -n ingress-apisix`.

This request is passing through the APISIX Gateway, which is validating the token via the `Authorization: Bearer` header. Then the request is passed internally to the workflow application which process and return to the original client.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Finally, this time, in the last part of the command output, you should see a json document similar to the scerp below, that indicates that the workflow instance was created successfully.
[source,json]
----
{"id":"a9fc1a97-e274-4e40-80e5-4ff5ba203231","workflowdata":{"message":"Hello from YAML Workflow, anonymous"}}
----

```

> = Using an Ingress to add Authentication and Authorization to Workflow Applications

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
= Using an Ingress to add authentication and authorization to Workflow applications
```

:keycloak_resource_owner_granttype_url: https://www.keycloak.org/docs/23.0.7/securing_apps/#_resource_owner_password_credentials_flow
:apisix_install_url: https://apisix.apache.org/docs/ingress-controller/deployments/minikube/

This document describes how you add an Ingress to a {product_name} workflow to handle authentication and authorization use cases.

In the approach outlined in this guide, protect your workflows from anonymous access outside the cluster with the link:{oidc_spec_url}[OpenID Connect] specification. 

Although the example demonstrated in this document is not meant to be used in production, you can use it as a reference to create your own architecture.

== Architecture

The following image illustrates a simplified architecture view of the recommended approach for protecting {product_name} workflow endpoints.

image::cloud/apisix-keycloak/ingress-apisix-keycloak.png[]

1. User makes a request with their credentials
2. APISIX do the JWT token introspection in the OIDC Server (Keycloak)
3. Keycloak validates the token
4. APISIX forwards the request to the workflow application

> This is a simplified approach for OIDC use cases. In production environments, you can tailor your gateway and OIDC server to meet your requirements and scope.

Reviewer 3: You might want to expand OIDC here. 
```suggestion
This is a simplified approach for OIDC use cases. In production environments, you can tailor your gateway and OIDC server to meet your requirements and scope.
```

[IMPORTANT]
====
This approach only protects the communication via Ingress. Direct calls to the workflow application link:{kubernetes_svc_url}[internal service] would be anonymous.
For example, another microservice in the cluster making requests to the workflow internal service.

> Make sure to set link:{kubernetes_networkpolicy_url}[Kuberbetes NetworkPolicies] to your workflow applications if this is not the desired behavior.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Set link:{kubernetes_networkpolicy_url}[Kuberbetes NetworkPolicies] to your workflow applications if this is not the desired behavior.
```

====

> == How to Deploy the Example Architecture

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
== How to deploy the example architecture
```

=== Installing Keycloak

From the example's cloned directory 'sonataflow-apisix-oidc', run the following command:

.Running kustomize to install Keycloak
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
kubectl create ns keycloak
kubectl kustomize manifests/bases | kubectl apply -f - -n keycloak
----

This command creates a namespace called `keycloak` and a Keycloak server deployment connected to a PostgreSQL database to persist your data across cluster restarts.

==== Exposing Keycloak Locally

[TIP]
====
You can skip this section if you are running on OpenShift or any cluster that you can expose Keycloak via an Ingress DNS or Route.
====

Since Keycloak is running on Minikube, expose the service port to your local network by running the following command:

.Exposing Keycloak to the local network
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
kubectl port-forward $(kubectl get pods -l app=keycloak --output=jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}' -n keycloak) 8080:8080 -n keycloak
----

From now on, every connection to the `8080` port is forwarded to the Keycloak service endpoint.

> The next step is to configure your local `/etc/hosts`. This step is needed because the token you are going to generate must come from the same URL that APISIX server introspects once you access the workflow.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The next step is to configure your local `/etc/hosts`. This step is needed because the token you are going to generate must come from the same URL that the APISIX server introspects once you access the workflow.
```

Edit your local `/etc/hosts` file and add the following line:

.Hosts file with the Keycloak address entry
[source,txt,subs="attributes+"]
----
127.0.0.1 keycloak.keycloak.svc.cluster.local
----

You can try accessing your Keycloak admin console in the address link:http://keycloak.keycloak.svc.cluster.local:8080[]. The default user and password are `admin`.

[IMPORTANT]
====
In real-life environments this step is not needed since Keycloak or any OIDC server is served by a load balancer with the correct address configured.
====

==== Configuring the Keycloak OIDC Server

In the next step, log in to the Keycloak admin console in the address link:http://keycloak.keycloak.svc.cluster.local:8080[] using the default credentials.

> Once you are logged into the console, click on *Create realm* in the top left menu. In this screen, create a new realm named `sonataflow`. See the image below for more details:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once you are logged into the console, click *Create realm* in the top left menu. In this screen, create a new realm named `sonataflow`. See the image below for more details:
```
